---
title: About
summary: >-
  We’re envisioning a Universe that’s expansive and dynamic, inclusive and lush, a perpetual explosion that defies temporal systems of organization or measurement.
declination: -1
ascension: 3
size: 2
color: '#f59e0b'
asterism: astrolabe
asterismFull: 'Astrolabe'
linkedTo:
  - submissions
---

We’re envisioning a Universe that’s expansive and dynamic, inclusive and lush, a perpetual explosion that defies
temporal systems of organization or measurement. Instead of publishing sequential issues or a stream of work that
relegates what came before to the background, we’re interested in connecting and recombining the work we publish and the
artists who make it on an ongoing basis. Letting the shape of their creations, however seeming-distant in genre or style
or intent, tell larger stories together.

We welcome you to stumble your way through the Universe in search of unexpected connection. And we hope that when you
find something you love, you feel drawn to explore the asterism it belongs to, the other stars in its vicinity, the
potential meanings of colors and shapes. We hope you’ll look into the voids in this ever-changing Universe and dream up
what might, someday, call that place a home.

<Break />

> “Change /  is the one unavoidable, / irresistible, / ongoing reality of the universe.” 
> — Octavia E. Butler 

Be forewarned: things will keep changing. <span className="text-fuchsia-600 font-bold italic">The Universe isn&rsquo;t a
fixed entity.</span>

We hope that’s exactly what will keep you coming back.

## Masthead

<Masthead />

## The Universe is open source

All the code behind *Astrolabe*, including the [Universe](/) visualization, is open source, meaning that you can view
the code, download it, edit it, or launch a competitor (or companion?) using it. It’s a small gesture toward our vision
of connectedness.

Check out [*Astrolabe* on GitHub](https://github.com/joelhans/astrolabe).

Certain aspects of *Astrolabe*’s ongoing development, like bugfixes and features we hope to add in the near future, are
handled in the [issues](https://github.com/joelhans/astrolabe/issues). If you see a bug or would like to make a
suggestion, and you happen to have a GitHub account, please feel free to add to the issues! If you're not on GitHub, you
can always [email](mailto:editors@astrolabe.ooo) us with bugs or ideas.

If you’d like to contribute to the code, you can run *Astrolabe* on a local development server, make changes, and then
create a pull request. We’d love to see some active development at this our strange little intersection of arts, code,
myth, and connection!

The only part of *Astrolabe* that can’t exist in an open source setting is the work from our contributors&mdash;as far
as we know, there is no way to reconcile the author’s copyright and the [rights we *do* ask
for](/submissions#your-rights) (FNASR) with any open source license, including the [current
license](https://github.com/joelhans/astrolabe/blob/main/LICENSE), which allows for copying, modification, and
redistribution.
