---
title: Get started with Athens
date: '2021-04-25'
tags: ['note-taking', 'markdown', 'research']
draft: false
summary: Learn how get the most out of your first 15 minutes with Athens, a free and open-source tool for building and maintaining a personal knowledge graph.
---

My friend and Netdata colleague Odysseas Lamtzidis ([@odysseas_lam](https://twitter.com/odysseas_lam)) recently told me
about [Athens Research](https://github.com/athensresearch/athens), which is a "knowledge graph for research and
notetaking." It's also free and open-source.

I've been using [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) for close to a year now, and was a fairly avid
[Notion](https://notion.so) user before that, so I'm fairly familiar with _some_ of the recent developments in this
space, but I'm by no means an expert in organizing a personal knowledge base, but I do have a curiosity.

I believe there's no better way to learn than to teach, with a little big of lag between the two. What better way to
learn this new tool, and hopefully make the Athens ecosystem a smoother than I found it, than a *Get started with
Athens* guide?

I won't cover [installation](https://github.com/athensresearch/athens/releases) here, and this won't be an exhaustive
list of Athens' features. Think of it like everything you need to have a successful first 15 minutes with your new
knowledge graph.

## The daily note

When you first get into Athens, you're greeted with a single note titled with today's date. This is your **daily note**.
How you use this daily note is up to you. No matter where you go in your knowledge graph, today's daily note is always a
click away with the calendar icon in the top panel.

I tend to use daily notes for keeping some unstructured thoughts about my day, checking in every now and then throughout
the day to add in some updates. I take notes about anything interesting I find, or as I organize my thoughts on a
specific subject, in separate pages. More on that later.

## Write in blocks

You might notice right away that as you type into your daily note, the line you're currently working on is highlighted
with a slightly darker gray color. This highlighted area is a **block**. Blocks can contain plain text, styled text
using subset of Markdown syntax, TODO checkboxes, and more.

On one level, blocks operate like paragraphs in Markdown or a Google Doc. When you feel a natural break in your writing,
hit `Enter` to start a new block. Continue as you would with any other writing or note-taking you're familiar with. You
don't _have_ to think about blocks any further than that.

But blocks are more than a container for text. You can move entire blocks around as you see fit, and you can reference
one block from within another, creating a connection between them. More on [references](#create-links-and-references) in
the next section.

To move a block, click and hold on the gray dot to its left, then drag to any other location in the page. As you drag,
you'll see a blue line that shows you where the block will drop if you release the click.

Blocks can also be nested inside of other blocks by dragging further to the right. Once you've nested some blocks,
collapse the parent by clicking on the chevron `⌄`.

<Video src="/static/images/get-started-athens/moving-blocks.mp4"></Video>

## Create links and references

Next, create a new page by clicking on the **Find or Create a Page** button in the top panel, or typing `Ctrl`/`⌘`+`K`.
Type in the name of the page, then hit `Enter`, or click on the area that says **Create Page:**.

Now that you have two pages, start building out your knowledge graph by linking between them.

Type `[[` followed by the first few characters of your daily note. For me, that's **April 24, 2021**. What that page
shows up on the dropdown, click in to finish the link. Hit `Enter`, and you'll see that the link is now blue, which
means it's active. Click it to navigate to your daily note.

In Athens, links are **bidirectional**, which means they now reference each other. Beneath every page you'll find an
area titled **Linked References**, which is where you can see all the pages that _link to your current page_.

Next, create a reference between blocks. Type `((` followed by the first few characters in the block you want to
reference. Find it in the dropdown and click on it to create the reference. Now, if you click on that reference block,
Athens zooms you in on that block.

Links are great for creating immediate connections between pages, while references are perfect for adding direct quotes
from something you've already written or collected.

<Video src="/static/images/get-started-athens/links-references.mp4"></Video>

## Move around your graph

Athens doesn't organize your pages into a hierarchy of folders and files, like you see as you explore the files on your
system. 

Instead, Athens expects you to create a **knowledge graph** using links and block references. Instead of relying on this
intricate hierarchical structure, which you'll need to consistently prune and optimize the more complex your knowledge
graph gets, Athens works best when you create lots of links and references between your pages.

Think about how you get around [Wikipedia](https://wikipedia.org). Do you browse an index of every article? Of course
not. You read a page, see a link to something else that's related or of interest, and continue exploring. Instead of a
hierarchy, it's a knowledge graph. 

Athens works the same way. You're responsible for creating the knowledge graph with [links and
references](#create-links-and-references), and then Athens gives you a few ways to navigate around it.

The most obvious way to get around is the **Find or Create a Page** button, or using `Ctrl`/`⌘`+`K`.

The calendar icon takes you to today's daily note. The page icon takes you to a list of all your pages. There's also
back and forward buttons to navigate between your most recent pages.

Click on the three dots to the left of any title to open a menu, which lets you add that page to your **Shortcuts**.

If you hold `Shift` and then click on any link, it'll open up in the right sidebar, which can contain any number of open
pages. This is useful if you're pulling information together from multiple notes and want to keep the references open
without having to switch between them with any of the aforementioned buttons.

<Video src="/static/images/get-started-athens/navigation.mp4"></Video>

## Export single pages

As of the last update, there is no way to [export your pages](https://github.com/athensresearch/athens/discussions/874)
to another format, even plain text. If you copy-paste an entire page into another editor, like VS Code, you'll notice
that every line begins with a `-` character.

Let's say you want to draft a blog post in Athens, then convert it to Markdown once you're ready to publish it on your
blog, which is some kind of static site generator (SSG). Select the entire page with `Ctrl`/`⌘`+`A`, then paste into
your text editor. 

I use [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/), and while the instructions vary between tools, the idea works anywhere.

Next, open up the find panel, and type `- ` into the find field. Type `\n`, which represents a new line, into the
replace field. Make sure you click the **Use Regular Expression** option (`.*`). Use **replace all** to remove every one
of those pesky hyphens. This bit of regex won't do anything smart with nested blocks, but that makes sense, given that
there's no concept of nested paragraphs in Markdown.

<Video src="/static/images/get-started-athens/export.mp4"></Video>

## What's next?

There's plenty more to learn about using Athens that I need to figure out myself, so I'll keep this guide updated with
anything else I think is essential to having a successful first 15 minutes. Beyond that, I'll create separate posts
covering the most interesting and useful bits.

If you have questions or corrections, [send me an email](mailto:j@joelhans.com).

### Further reading & resources

- [@AthensResearch](https://mobile.twitter.com/AthensResearch)
- [Athens Research on GitHub](https://github.com/athensresearch/athens)
- [Documentation](https://app.gitbook.com/@athensresearch/s/handbook/)
- [Discord](https://discord.gg/GCJaV3V)
